---
layout: post
category: theology
title: Genesis 25
date: 2026-01-09
comments: true
---
Genesis 26 - Isaac and the Philistines

Another famine comes upon the land, and the Lord tells Isaac not to go down to Egypt, but rather to stay there in Gerar. In this way, Isaac does not follow in his father’s footsteps. However, he then says to the men of Gerar that Rebekah is his sister, so that the men would not kill him to have Rebekah for themselves. Remember, this is exactly what his father Abraham did with Sarai twice: first with Pharaoh and then with Abimelech.

This story of Isaac and Abimelech is meant to parallel the story of Abraham and Abimelech in Genesis 20. It is comforting to know that the Hebrew patriarchs are not perfect. How many of us also repeat the sins of our parents?

More Parallels:
* The local herdsmen quarrel with Isaac’s herdsmen (20). In Genesis 13, Abraham’s herdsmen quarrel with Lot’s herdsmen.
* Isaac went to Beer-sheba, built an altar, called on the name of the Lord, and pitched his tent (23-25). In Genesis 21, Abraham went to Beer-sheba, planted a tree, and called on the name of the Lord

Isaac stays in the land and remains committed to his father's mission, and it is working. Isaac stays in the land, builds wells, and suffers injustice, but he shows care for others by letting it go and moving on. The beginning of the chapter was full of strife with the Philistines who were envious of his wealth and who sent him away (14,16,20,27), but at the end of the chapter, the people see that the Lord is with Isaac and want to make a covenant with him. In this way, Isaac continues the covenant made between the Lord and Abraham, that all nations would be blessed by him and his offspring (12:3 and 22:18). 

Isaac was not the generation to receive the mission and the promise, but he did keep it.

Hebrews 11:40 (Hall of Faith) - “God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect.”

Those before us would not be made perfect without us. How can we better steward the mission to increase the faith of the next generation?

## References
1. The Hebrew - Greek Key Study Bible (KJV Version)
2. [The BEMA Podcast, Episode 12: A Mission Realized](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/the-bema-podcast/id1148115183?i=1000378996962)
3. [The Torah Portion-by-Portion by Rabbi Seymour Rossel (2007)](https://a.co/d/boaYc5X)