---
layout: post
category: theology
title: Genesis 36
date: 2026-01-29
comments: true
---
Genesis 36 - The Jacob Story

It turns out that the entire life story of Jacob so far, from Genesis 25 to Genesis 36, is considered a large-scale chiasm by many scholars.

Chiasm:
* A: Abraham's Other Family Record (25:1-6)
* B: Abraham Dies (25:7-11)
* C: Ishmael's Family (25:12-18)
* D: Struggle in childbirth, Jacob and Esau born (25:19-34)
* E: Rebekah in a foreign place, pact with foreigners (26:1-34)
* F: Jacob flees Esau (27-28:9)
* G: Messengers (28:10-22)
* H: Arrival at Haran (29:1-30)
* I: Jacob's wives are fertile (29:31-30:24)

------ Middle ------

* I': Jacob's flocks are fertile (30:25-43)
* H': Flight from Haran (31:1-54)
* G': Messengers (32:1-32)
* F': Jacob returns to Esau (33:1-20)
* E': Dinah in a foreign place, no pact with foreigners (34:1-31)
* D': Struggle in childbirth, Benjamin born (35:16-21)
* C': Jacob's Sons (35:22-26)
* B': Isaac Dies (35:27-29)
* A': Esau's Family Record (36)

## Middle
> Genesis 30:22-25 - "And God remembered Rachel, and God hearkened to her, and opened her womb. And she conceived, and bare a son; and said, God hath taken away my reproach: And she called his name Joseph; and said, The Lord shall add to me another son. And it came to pass, when Rachel had born Joseph, that Jacob said unto Laban, Send me away, that I may go unto mine own place, and to my country."

In this middle portion of the chiasm, we read that Rachel gives birth to a son which she named Joseph, and Jacob decides to return to Canaan. God has singled out Joseph before he was even born. We will read about him next in Genesis.

## References
1. The Hebrew - Greek Key Study Bible (KJV Version)
2. Rendsburg, Gary A. (2020) "Chiasmus in the Book of Genesis," BYU Studies: Vol. 59: Iss. 5, Article 3. Available at: [https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/byusq/vol59/iss5/3](https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/byusq/vol59/iss5/3)