---
layout: post
category: theology
title: Genesis 32
date: 2026-01-25
comments: true
---
Genesis 32 - Jacob Wrestles with God

Problems:
* Man just shows up out of nowhere (24)
* How can a person be both alone and yet wrestle with someone at the same time? (24)
* The man touches Jacob’s hip and takes it out of the socket (25)
* The man injures Jacob, but the next verse is the man asking Jacob to let him go (25-26)
* Why does Jacob think to ask for a blessing? (26)
* Why does the man resist being identified? (29)

Names are important - you find your identity and characteristics in a name.

This is the start of the Israelites, the people that God has chosen to partner with. As all believers have been grafted in to His chosen people by faith, the question becomes - Does God want to wrestle with us? 

How can we wrestle with Him? We do this by asking questions, by having doubts that cause us to lean in to God and his Word. When we lean in and then have our questions answered, we can stop wrestling with God and receive a blessing! Everyone has doubts on some level, but we can not let that stop us from pursuing the truth and asking questions.

Genesis 32:30 - "And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel [meaning, 'the face of God']: for I have seen God [Elohim] face to face, and my life is preserved."

 Hosea 12:2-5 - "The Lord hath also a controversy with Judah, and will punish Jacob according to his ways; according to his doings will he recompense him. He took his brother by the heel in the womb, and by his strength he had power with God: Yea, he had power over the angel, and prevailed: he wept, and made supplication unto him: he found him in Bethel, and there he spake with us; Even the Lord God of hosts; the Lord is his memorial."

had power (3) = Hebr. 'was a prince' or 'behaved himself princely'
had power (4) = sūr - to vanquish; to saw, to contend

Notice here in verse 4, the writer says that an angel visited Jacob. It can then be inferred that the angel was the Lord God [Adonai Elohim], given its claim to be God in the first person in Genesis 32:28.

> Deuteronomy 6:4 - "Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord:"

## Name Change
Jacob -> Israel (or Yisrael [Hebr.])

Yisrael
* ysr = to wrestle
* el = God

**OR**

Yisrael
* yashar = straight
* el = God

This name means 'the one who shows that God is true'

**OR**

Yisrael
* sar =  prince
* el = God

This name means 'prince of God'

## References
1. The Hebrew - Greek Key Study Bible (KJV Version)
2. [The BEMA Podcast, Episode 13: Grappling with God, Part 2](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/the-bema-podcast/id1148115183?i=1000379893739)
3. [The Torah Portion-by-Portion by Rabbi Seymour Rossel (2007)](https://a.co/d/boaYc5X)
4. Commentary on Hosea 12 (by Matthew Henry) - [Blue Letter Bible](https://www.blueletterbible.org/Comm/mhc/Hsa/Hsa_012.cfm)