---
layout: post
category: theology
title: Genesis 43
date: 2026-02-16
comments: true
---
Genesis 43 - The Brothers Return to Egypt

<br>

Jacob again asks his sons to go down to Egypt to get more food (2).

> Genesis 43:8-9 - "And Judah said unto Israel his father, Send the lad with me, and we will arise and go; that we may live, and not die, both we, and thou, and also our little ones. I will be surety for him; of my hand shalt thou require him: if I bring him not unto thee, and set him before thee, then **let me bear the blame for ever**:"

In this chapter we read that Judah asks Jacob if he could take Benjamin to Egypt, and offers himself up as collateral if anything happens to Benjamin. This is major chutzpah on his part (read verse 10), and a point of growth in taking personal responsibility.

This move by Judah changes the mind of Jacob, and he allows them to take Benjamin down to Egypt. Reuben's offer of his two sons as collateral did not get Jacob's attention in [Genesis 42](https://fnmckee.com/theology/2026/02/13/genesis-42.html), but Judah's offer of himself did.

> Genesis 43:28 - “And they answered, Thy servant our father is in good health, he is yet alive. And they bowed down their heads, and made obeisance.”

This is the second instance of the brothers bowing down to Joseph (without knowing it was him), as foretold by Joseph as a child in Genesis 37. 

> Genesis 43:30 - “And Joseph made haste; for his bowels did yearn upon his brother: and he sought where to weep; and he entered into his chamber, and wept there.”

This is the second instance of Joseph weeping in the story.

> Genesis 43:31-32 - “And he washed his face, and went out, and refrained himself, and said, Set on bread. And they set on for him by himself, and for them by themselves, and for the Egyptians, which did eat with him, by themselves: because the Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews; for that is an abomination unto the Egyptians.”

Why was it “an abomination” for the Egyptians to eat with Hebrews? The ancient Egyptians were a proud people, and their customs were different from those of the Hebrews. For example, because of the heat, Egyptians would bathe often, but the Hebrews rarely bathed because water was rare and precious in Canaan. Therefore, the ancient Egyptians looked upon Hebrews as savages, and would not eat near them for a meal. 

> Genesis 43:34 - “And he took and sent messes unto them from before him: but Benjamin's mess was five times so much as any of their's. And they drank, and were merry with him.”

Why did Joseph give Benjamin a portion of 5 times more than any of the other brothers? This was a test to see if the brothers would respond with envy, as it was the other son of Rachel (and the youngest son) receiving favor. 

Rabbi Shlomo Yitzchaki (1040–1105), known by the acronym Rashi, says that Benjamin was given the portion allotted to him, as well as the portions of Joseph, his wife Asenath, and his sons Ephraim and Manasseh. We do not necessarily know if this is true, but it is an interesting theory as to where the extra portions came from.

## References
1. The Hebrew - Greek Key Study Bible (KJV Version)
2. [The BEMA Podcast, Episode 16: Out of the Pit](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/16-out-of-the-pit/id1148115183?i=1000380437661)
3. [The Torah Portion-by-Portion by Rabbi Seymour Rossel (2007)](https://a.co/d/boaYc5X)
4. [Rashi on Genesis 43:34](https://www.sefaria.org/Rashi_on_Genesis.43.34.2?)