---
layout: post
category: theology
title: Genesis 29-30a
date: 2026-01-20
comments: true
---
Genesis 29-30:1-24 - Jacob's Family Record

<br>

## Genesis 29
Jacob met Rachel at a well. I wonder if his parents (Isaac or Rebekah) told him the story of Abraham's servant who met Rebekah at the well, to be the wife for Isaac.

Was Rachel aware of the deception of her father Laban and her sister Leah? Did she try to stop it or did she allow it to happen?

> Genesis 29:25 - "And Laban said, 'It must not be so done in our country, to give the younger before the firstborn.'"

Was this true, or was this also part of the deception? If it was true, then why did Rachel not tell Jacob of the custom?

> Genesis 29:20 - “And Jacob served seven years for Rachel; and they seemed unto him but for a few days, for the love he had to her.”

> Genesis 29:30 - “And he went in also unto Rachel, and he loved also Rachel more than Leah, and served with him yet seven other years.”

This reminds us of how Isaac and Rebekah played favorites with their sons.

Besides physical attraction, perhaps Jacob loved Rachel more because of her sacrifice in allowing Leah to marry first and not be put to shame as the older daughter.

Other Reminders:
* Genesis 29:10 - Jacob watering Rachel's flocks remind us of his mother Rebekah watering the flocks of Abraham's servant
* Genesis 29:17 - Leah's tender (weak) eyes remind us of Isaac's eyes that were "too dim to see"

## Genesis 30

Jacob's Children:

| Leah | Leah (via Zilpah) | Rachel | Rachel (via Bilhah) |
| ---- | ----------------- | ------ | ------------------- |
| Reuben | Gad | Joseph | Dan |
| Simeon | Asher | Benjamin (Genesis 35:18) | Naphtali |
| Levi | | | | 
| Judah | | | |
| Issachar | | | |
| Zebulun | | | |
| Dinah (daughter) | | | |

Birth Order:
1. Reuben (29:32)
2. Simeon (29:33)
3. Levi (29:34)
4. Judah (29:3)
5. Dan (30:5-6)
6. Naphtali (30:7-8)
7. Gad (30:10-11)
8. Asher (30:12-13)
9. Issachar (30:17-18)
10. Zebulun (30:19-20)
11. Dinah (daughter) (30:21)
12. Joseph (30:22-24)
13. Benjamin (Genesis 35:18)

The idea that God controls who will have children is important in this story. 

> Genesis 29:31 - "And when the Lord saw that Leah was hated, he opened her womb: but Rachel was barren."

> Genesis 30:17 - "And God hearkened unto Leah, and she conceived, and bare Jacob the fifth son."

> Genesis 30:22 - "And God remembered Rachel, and God hearkened to her, and opened her womb."

Only then did Rachel give birth to Joseph.

## References
1. The Hebrew - Greek Key Study Bible (KJV Version)
2. [The BEMA Podcast, Episode 13: Grappling with God, Part 1](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/the-bema-podcast/id1148115183?i=1000379638718)
3. [The Torah Portion-by-Portion by Rabbi Seymour Rossel (2007)](https://a.co/d/boaYc5X)