---
layout: post
category: theology
title: Galatians 6
permalink: /blog/galatians/6
date: 2026-07-10
description: The Practice of Love
comments: true
---
The Practice of Love

<br>

## The Practice of Love (1-6)

> Galatians 6:1-2 - "Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ."

This again requires that a person recognizes that they can not save themselves. There can be no "bearing of another's burdens" if those burdens are never confessed. If someone believes that they can save themself and fix the problem by themself then there typically is no room for confession.

> Galatians 6:3 - "For if a man think himself to be something, when he is nothing, he deceiveth himself."

We are all nothing, and none of us can save ourselves. The confession of sins is an acknowledgement of this fact. The Lord Jesus Christ is our Savior, the source of our salvation.

> Galatians 6:4-5 - "But let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another. For every man shall bear his own burden."

This does not contradict the earlier verses as these verses are referring to our appearance before God after death where we will be held accountable for our own individual works.

> 2 Corinthians 5:10 - "For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ; that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad."

We must take care to examine what we have done so that on judgement day we will be able to rejoice!

> Galatians 6:6 - "Let him that is taught in the word communicate unto him that teacheth in all good things."

Those who are taught or encouraged in the Word from a pastor or preacher should "communicate unto him" "in all good things." This specifically implies financial support through giving:

> 1 Corinthians 9:14 - "Even so hath the Lord ordained that they which preach the gospel should live of the gospel."

## The Principle of Sowing and Reaping (7-10)

Paul then writes that it is beneficial for the one who is taught to give to the teacher (pastor, preacher) because whatever a man sows, that he shall reap. If a man spends all his money on his flesh (the self) he will reap corruption, but if a man generously uses his money for the Spirit (giving to others) then he will reap life everlasting. This principle also applies to good works. (7-9)

Paul is not promoting a cause and effect relationship with God, that when we do good we will receive good, and when we do bad we will receive bad. Paul is simply giving us a general principle (not a law) regarding our focus on the Spirit vs. the self. If we continue to only focus on the flesh (the self) then we will eventually reap corruption, as the flesh and the Spirit are contrary to eachother (see [Galatians 5]({{ '/blog/galatians/5' | relative_url }})). 

> Galatians 6:10 - "As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially unto them who are of the household of faith."

## Paul's Closing Remarks (11-18) 

Paul then uses the end of his letter to wrap up his arguement against the doctrine of the Judaizers.

The desire of the Judaizers that the Galatian Christians would be circumcised was a desire of the flesh. Paul writes that the Judaizers would "glory in your flesh", meaning that they would glorify themselves if they were able to convince the Galatian Christians to be circumcised. 

Their other motivation was to avoid persecution from other legalists for saying that cross of the Christ was enough, and that obedience to the law is not a requirement to be saved. After all, as Paul writes, neither the Judaizers themselves keep the law, yet they desire the Galatian Christians to keep the law by being circumcised. (12-13)

> Galatians 6:14 - "But God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world."

Paul only found glory in the true doctrine of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ on the cross, which justifies all who believe. Paul knows that for those in Christ Jesus, whether they are circumcised or uncircumcised does not matter. (15)

> Galatians 6:16 - "And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God."

Those who walk according to this doctrine will receive peace and mercy - they are the true Israel who believe by faith and hope in the promise (see [Galatians 4]({{ '/blog/galatians/4' | relative_url }})).

## References
1. The Hebrew - Greek Key Study Bible (KJV Version)
2. [Galatians 6 - Greek Interlinear](https://biblehub.com/interlinear/galatians/6.htm)