---
layout: post
category: theology
title: Galatians 4
permalink: /blog/galatians/4
date: 2026-07-06 
description: The Believer's Inheritance
comments: true
---
The Believer's Inheritance

<br>

## The Believer's Inheritance (1-20)

Paul begins this chapter continuing from the previous chapter, regarding what it means to be an heir.

When someone is a child, they are no different than a servant, though they will eventually receive an inheritance. The child is still under the authority of others, just as the servant is, until the time appointed by the father where the child becomes a man. (1-2)

Similarly, we are sons of God through faith in Christ Jesus, and are heirs according to the promise. The law acts as our authority while we are still a child, with the effect to bring us into bondage under the "elements of the world", namely cause and effect. From the principle of cause and effect do we get the idea that if we do good then we deserve to receive good, and if we do bad then we deserve to receive bad (also known as karma). (3)

> Galatians 4:4-5 - "But when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, To redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons."

And since we (believers) are now adopted into the family of God as sons, we are an heir of God through Christ. Our inheritance is grace, which is the opposite of cause and effect. God's grace does not deal with us on the basis of what we deserve, rather His grace is completely outside of us.

> Galatians 4:9 - " But now, after that ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye again to the weak and beggarly elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage?"

This does not mean that the principle of cause and effect no longer exists, as we see this principle evident in the natural law of the land. Instead, cause and effect should no longer define a person's relationship with God. When a child becomes a man, cause and effect should be fully replaced with grace. Why then do believers who have received the inheritance of grace seek to be in bondage again with the principle of cause of effect? Why do we believe that if we sin, God will punish us with a sentence according to our sin? (9)

The Judaizers commanded the observance of days, months, seasons, and years - believing that this made a person more holy. Paul feared that the legalism of the Judaizers (and those Galatian Christians who listened) would make his labor to them in vain! (10-11)

> Galatians 4:12 - "Brethren, I beseech you, be as I am; for I am as ye are: ye have not injured me at all."

Paul knows where they are coming from - he used to be a Jew living under bondage to legalism. In that regard, Paul became like the Galatian Christians and saw that it was not the correct doctrine. Why is Paul now asking the Galatians to be like him? He wants them to return back to the doctrine of grace that they originally knew - the one Paul originally taught them. Paul also clarifies that he was not personally hurt or offended, but he simply wanted them to possess the correct doctrine.

Paul then appeals to the Galatian Christians to remember his first visit to them. It was because of a physical infirmity that Paul went to Galatia to preach the gospel to them. He notes that the Galatian Christians then did not reject him because of his physical infirmity, therefore they should now not consider Paul as an enemy to them when he is confronting them with the truth. (13-16)

> Galatians 4:17-18 - "They zealously affect you, but not well; yea, they would exclude you, that ye might affect them. But it is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing, and not only when I am present with you."

The Judaizers were known for zealously courting the Galatian Christians. Paul recognizes that the Judaizers tactic is to try to exclude them from other Christians and get them to join their group. Many Galatian Christians were impressed by the zeal of the Judaizers, but Paul says zeal is only good if it is directed at a good thing.

## Isaac and Ishmael (21-31)

Paul then transitions into a conversation about the contrasting natures of grace and law using analogies from the Old Testament.

> Galatians 4:21 - "Tell me, ye that desire to be under the law, do ye not hear the law?"

Paul is speaking directly to the Judaizers here, as well as to the Galatian Christians who listen to them. 

Abraham had two sons, Ishmael who was born by the servant Hagar, and Isaac who was born by Sarah, a free woman.

> Galatians 4:23 - "But he who was of the bondwoman was born after the flesh; but he of the freewoman was by promise."

> Genesis 18:10,14 - "And he said, I will certainly return unto thee according to the time of life; and, lo, Sarah thy wife shall have a son. And Sarah heard it in the tent door, which was behind him. Is any thing too hard for the Lord? At the time appointed I will return unto thee, according to the time of life, and Sarah shall have a son."

There are thus two covenants, one from Hagar and one from Sarah. 

| Hagar | Sarah |
| ----- | ----- |
| Ishmael, born after the flesh | Isaac, born after promise |
| Mount Sinai | Mount Zion |
| Jerusalem on earth | Heavenly Jerusalem |
| Bondage | Freedom |

Mount Sinai is the place where Moses received the Law in [Exodus 19]({{ '/blog/exodus/19' | relative_url }}) and [Exodus 20]({{ '/blog/exodus/20' | relative_url }}). This covenant is associated with the city of Jerusalem, as in Paul's day, most Jewish people tried to be right with God by trusting in their own ability to keep the law.

> Galatians 4:29 - "But as then he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now."

Christians are ones who identify with Isaac as children of Sarah by a promise that was received by faith (28,31). Paul says they will be actively persecuted by those who follow God in the flesh (just as Ishmael and his descendants persecuted Isaac and his descendants).

> Galatians 4:30 - "Nevertheless what saith the scripture? Cast out the bondwoman and her son: for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the freewoman."

This means that the son of Hagar, that is Ishmael, would not be an heir with the son of Sarah, that is Isaac.

> Genesis 21:10,12 - "Wherefore she [Sarah] said unto Abraham, Cast out this bondwoman and her son: for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even with Isaac. And God said unto Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy sight because of the lad, and because of thy bondwoman; in all that Sarah hath said unto thee, hearken unto her voice; for in Isaac shall thy seed be called."

It is interesting that God does not rebuke Sarah for casting out Hagar and Ishmael, but instead God affirms her by telling Abraham to cast them out. Grace and the Law can not live together as principles for our life and affect how we view our relationship with God. 

The Scriptures are clear that those who believe they can save themselves by the works of the law will not inherit the Kingdom with those who know they are only saved by the death of Jesus Christ for their state of sin.

## References
1. The Hebrew - Greek Key Study Bible (KJV Version)
2. [Galatians 4 - Greek Interlinear](https://biblehub.com/interlinear/galatians/4.htm)
3. [Galatians 4 - Enduring Word Commentary](https://enduringword.com/bible-commentary/galatians-4/)