---
layout: post
category: theology
title: Galatians 3
permalink: /blog/galatians/3
date: 2026-06-25
description: The Purpose of the Law
comments: true
---
The Purpose of the Law

<br>

## The Experience of the Galatians (1-18)

Paul begins this chapter with a question - Is the Spirit recieved by the works of the law (following the law), or by faith? Does God minister to us and work miracles among us according to our ability to follow the law, or by faith? (2,5)

Paul will use this chapter to show that the Spirit is recieved by faith, not by our ability to follow the law.

> Galatians 3:6-7 - "Even as Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness. Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham."

Abraham believed (faith) God, and it was credited to him for righteousness. It was not that his faith made him actually morally righteous, but he was justified as righteous before God. They which are of the faith are considered to be children of Abraham. 

> Genesis 15:6 - "And he [Abram] believed in the Lord; and He counted it to him for righteousness."

Abram's (or Abraham's) faith was counted to him for righteousness before he was circumcised, without being baptized, and more than 400 years before the law was given to his descendants.

> Galatians 3:8-9 - "And the scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the heathen [Gentiles] through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed. So then they which be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham."

Again we see that the gospel is for all people, not just for Jews and not just for Gentiles. It is the same message in the Old Testament and the New Testament. The Lord wanted to bless Abram, so that through him, the Lord could bless all the nations of the world.

> Genesis 12:2-3 - "And I [the Lord] will make of thee [Abram] a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing: And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee: and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed."

Paul then shows in verse 10 how anyone who seeks to follow the law is cursed, unless they follow **all** of the laws which are written (which no one can do). Just as in a court of law, if a person follows every law, but does not follow one, they are considered to be guilty and are given a legal sentence, even though they followed every other law. In court, the crime is the reason the person is there, just as our sins are the reason we will stand before God when we die.

Paul then references the Scriptures to show that only faith can justify us before God:

> Habakkuk 2:4 - "Behold, his soul which is lifted up is not upright in him: but the just shall live by his faith."

No man is justified by the law because the law is not of faith, but requires action to keep:

> Leviticus 18:5 - "Ye shall therefore keep my statutes, and my judgments: which if a man do, he shall live in them: I am the Lord."

Thanks be to Christ who redeemed us from the curse of the law, which we deserve, taking the curse upon Himself on the cross! (13)

If Christ did not come and die on the cross, salvation would be dependent on knowing and following the Jewish law. Christ came and died on the cross so that the Gentiles could be saved!

The Lord made a covenant with Abraham in [Genesis 12]({{ '/blog/genesis/12' | relative_url }}):

> Genesis 12:7 - "And the Lord appeared unto Abram, and said, Unto thy seed will I give this land: and there builded he an altar unto the Lord, who appeared unto him."

The word seed is singular, referencing one seed, that is Christ. (16)

The law came 430 years after the Lord made this covenant with Abraham, and it does not disanull the Lord's promises to Abraham:

> Galatians 3:18 - "For if the inheritance be of the law, it is no more of promise: but God gave it to Abraham by promise."

## The Purpose of the Law (19-29)

What then is the purpose of the law?

It was added because of our transgressions, until the seed, which is Jesus Christ, should come. (19)

transgressions - Strong's Concordance [3847]
* transgression, an act which is excessive
* the transgression of a commandment distinctly given is more serious than sin

> Galatians 3:21 - "Is the law then against the promises of God? God forbid: for if there had been a law given which could have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the law."

The Scriptures have shown that all people are under sin. This would be a sentence of death, if not for the promise of life by faith in Jesus Christ. (22)

sin - Strong's Concordence [266]
* sin as a state (noun)

> Romans 3:9-10 - "What then? are we better than they? No, in no wise: for we have before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin; As it is written, There is none righteous, no, not one:"

Before the life-giving promise of faith in Jesus Christ, all people were kept under the law. Paul says here that the purpose of the law was to be a "schoolmaster", that is to reveal to us our shortcomings and to bring us to Christ, so that we might be justified by faith. (23-24)

> Galatians 3:25 - "But after that faith is come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster."

By faith, all believers of Christ are considered children of God. (26)

> Galatians 3:27 - "For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ."

Notice this verse says "baptized into Christ", not "baptized into water". Baptism into Christ by faith must come first - without first having faith, baptism in water is in vain. Believers get baptized in water because of their relationship as children of God by faith, not to earn this relationship.

> Galatians 3:28-29 - "There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise."

Paul is making it clear to everyone that we are all equal under Christ, both Jews and Gentiles, including the Judaizers. This does not mean that there are no natural distinctions between people, but that these differences should not disqualify anyone from fellowship.

All those who believe in Christ are children of God, members of Abraham's seed, and heirs to eternity - just like Christ.