---
layout: post
category: theology
title: Galatians 5
permalink: /blog/galatians/5
date: 2026-07-08
description: The Spirit vs. The Self
comments: true
---
The Spirit vs. The Self

<br>

## The Privileges of Christian Liberty (1-26)

> Galatians 5:1 - "Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage."

Christ is the one who has made us free, not ourselves. If the Galatians were to obey the Judaizers and be circumcised as a way to earn this freedom, it would nullify the freedom and righteousness that Christ died to give them. (2)

If a person seeks to earn their righteousness by following the law, they are in bondage to follow the whole law. Using a previous analogy, if a person follows every law except for one, they are still considered a criminal and are given a sentence of "guilty" in a court of law. Those that seek to be justified by the law are considered fallen from grace, with Christ becoming of no effect to them. (3-4)

> Galatians 5:5-6 - "For we through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by faith. For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision; but faith which worketh by love."

Instead of striving to follow the whole law (which is impossible), Christians wait for their righteousness by faith - they do not try to earn their own righteousness.

Paul then expresses his desire that the Galatian Christians would not listen to the Judaizers. He tells them that the persuasion of the Judaizers does not come from the Lord who called them. The Galatian Christians should not allow what seems like a little legalism to grow into a bigger issue and corrupt everyone. (7-10)

Paul then makes it clear that he does not preach circumcision to the Gentiles as a way to save themselves, but instead preaches the offence of the cross. Believing in the offence of the cross is an acknowledgement that the whole reason Jesus had to die was because there was no way for you to save yourself. (11)

> Galatians 5:13-14 - " For, brethren, ye have been called unto liberty; only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another. For all the law is fulfilled in one word, even in this; Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself."

This commandment (first seen in Leviticus 19:18) fulfills all the law - that you love others as much as you love yourself. The flesh is only concerned with the self, so by serving others through love you will conquer the flesh. We must also take heed that we do not consume one another - two selfish people together will eventually consume one another. (15)

> Galatians 5:16-17 - "This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh. For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other: so that ye cannot do the things that ye would."

In order to walk in the Spirit we will first be led by the Spirit. This means that we (the self) are not the initiator. The Spirit will lead us to do things that are contrary to the self, as the Spirit and the flesh are always opposed to one another. When we walk in step with the Spirit, we will not fulfill the desires of the flesh, because it is impossible to do so!

To be led by the Spirit means that you are not under the law, seeking to earn your own righteousness by following the law. (18)

Works of the flesh:
* adultery
* fornication
* uncleanness
* lasciviousness (lewdness)
* idolatry
* witchcraft (sorcery)
* hatred
* variance (contentions)
* emulations (jealousies)
* wrath
* strife
* seditions (dissensions)

"They which [ppt] do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God." (21)

[ppt] do = The present participle denotes continuous or repeated action

Paul often uses the present participle to distinguish between believers and nonbelievers (see [Romans 1]({{ '/blog/romans/1' | relative_url }})). It is clear that he is referring to nonbelivers who continuously or repeatedly sin in this passage, that they will not inherit the kingdom of God. This passage is not saying that a believer who struggles with sin will not inherit the kingdom of God.

Fruit of the Spirit:
* love
* joy
* peace
* longsuffering (patience)
* gentleness
* faith
* meekness
* temperance

Against these things there is no law. (23)

> Galatians 5:24-25 - "And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit."

## References
1. The Hebrew - Greek Key Study Bible (KJV Version)
2. [Galatians 5 - Greek Interlinear](https://biblehub.com/interlinear/galatians/5.htm)