---
layout: post
category: theology
title: Galatians 1
permalink: /blog/galatians/1
date: 2026-06-22
description: The One True Gospel
comments: true
---
The One True Gospel

<br>

Paul begins his letter to the Galatians with a greeting, and then continues with a quick summary of the Gospel:

> Galatians 1:3-4 - "Grace be to you and peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ, Who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil world, according to the will of God and our Father:"

## The One True Gospel (6-10)

Paul is surprised that the Galatians have been removed from this Gospel of grace unto a different gospel (6).

gospel - Strong's Concordance [2098]
* the good news of the kingdom of God and salvation through Christ
* in Paul's epistles used of the basic facts of the death, burial, and resurrection of Christ, and of the interpretation of these facts

Paul then goes further and says that the different gospel being preached can not even be considered another gospel, but has been the Gospel of Christ perverted (7).

> Galatians 1:9 - "As we said before, so say I now again, if any man preach any other gospel unto you than that ye have received, let him be accursed."

## Paul's Call to Ministry (11-24)

Paul then begins to establish his authority as an apostle.

> Galatians 1:11-12 - "But I certify you, brethren, that the gospel which was preached of me is not after man. For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ."

Paul tells of how in the past he used to persecute the church and "destroy it." He was a Jew, and was exceedingly zealous of the traditions of his ancestors. (13-14)

However, when Paul had an encounter with God and the Son was revealed to him, he was called to preach the Christian Gospel to the Gentiles. (15-16)

Paul then says that he did not immediately seek out the apostles in Jerusalem to confer with them, but he obeyed his calling and went to Arabia and Damascus. Only later did he see Peter and James (Jesus's brother). (16-19)

> Galatians 1:22-24 - "And was unknown by face unto the churches of Judaea which were in Christ: But they had heard only, That he which persecuted us in times past now preacheth the faith which once he destroyed. And they glorified God in me."

## References
1. The Hebrew - Greek Key Study Bible (KJV Version)
2. [Galatians 1 - Greek Interlinear](https://biblehub.com/interlinear/galatians/1.htm)



