---
layout: post
category: theology
title: Leviticus 1
permalink: /blog/leviticus/1
date: 2026-07-12
description: A Kingdom of Priests
comments: true
---
A Kingdom of Priests

<br>

> Leviticus 1:1-2 - "And the Lord called unto Moses, and spake unto him out of the tabernacle of the congregation, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel..."

In other ancient religions, such as ancient Egypt, priests kept their laws and rituals secret from the people, and thus they were thought by the people to have magic powers. But here in Leviticus, the Lord commands Moses to speak to all the Israelite people. The priestly laws are given to all of us. 

> Exodus 19:6 - "And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation. These are the words which thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel."

All people of Israel are to be a "kingdom of priests". This does not say that Israel is to be a kingdom that has priests, but a kingdom **of** priests - meaning the entire kingdom is meant to be priests.

## Leviticus 1

This first chapter of Leviticus details the types of burnt offerings that people would sacrifice before the Lord. Bernard Bamberger (1904-1980), a modern commentator, notes that ancient people thought the gods lived not by eating the food offered to them, but by inhaling it. 

There are a few types of burnt offering listed here in Leviticus 1:

> Leviticus 1:3 - "If his offering be a burnt sacrifice of the herd..."

> Leviticus 1:10 - "And if his offering be of the flocks, namely, of the sheep, or of the goats..."

> Leviticus 1:14 - "And if the burnt sacrifice for his offering to the Lord be of fowls..."

These three groups of sacrifices are all to be "a burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord." (9,13,17)

Israelites often brought burnt-offering when they thought they had sinned and wanted to atone, so it was usually voluntary. The rich brought bulls, rams, or male goats, while the people who were poor could bring turtledoves or young pigeons.

## References
1. The Hebrew - Greek Key Study Bible (KJV Version)
2. [The Torah Portion-by-Portion by Rabbi Seymour Rossel (2007)](https://a.co/d/boaYc5X)