---
layout: post
category: theology
title: Genesis 21-22
date: 2026-01-04
comments: true
---
Genesis 21-22 - Isaac

## Genesis 21
A son is born to Sarah, and Abraham named him Isaac. Abraham circumcised his son Isaac when he was eight days old.

This fulfills the covenant that God made with Abram! 

Sarah seems to tell her story here with a sense of healing and personal growth. Notice she acknowledges her laughter here!

Hagar sat a bowshot away.
Ishmael grew up to be an archer. 

Problems:
* No one calls Ishmael by his name, just “the son of Hagar”
* Ishmael makes fun of Isaac (word for laughter), but why does Sarah cast Hagar and her son out?
* Why does God agree with Sarah to cast Hagar and her son out?
* Ishmael was put under a bush, but he’s at least 13 now! Hagar also carries her son on her shoulders
* Hagar leaves her son under a bush to die

## Genesis 22 - God Tests Abraham
Problems:
* God says to take his only son, but that is not his only son
* Where is Abraham’s chutzpah now, he doesn’t even try to argue to save his son
* That walk should have taken one day, but it took three days. Abraham took the long way

The world of Abraham is used to child sacrifice, usually the firstborn. This test should be something Abraham is used to seeing in other cultures.

Did Abraham believe that God would raise his son from the dead? (Hebrews 11:17-19)

## Parallels:
* Hagar - Genesis 21
* Abraham - Genesis 22

| Hagar | Abraham |
| ----- | ------- |
| “Early the next morning” (21:14a) | “Early the next morning” (22:3) |
| Abraham sets supplies on Hagar’s shoulders (21:14b) | Abraham sets supplies on Isaac’s shoulders (22:6) |
| Hagar puts boy under “brush” (21:15) | Abraham puts boy on/over “brush” (22:9) |
| Hagar looks up to see a well (21:19) | Abraham looks up to see a ram (22:13) |
| Hagar story ends with a covenant (21:22-34) | Abraham story ends with a covenant (22:15-19) |

These stories are meant to be next to each other. We should be juxtaposing what is different about the covenant with Hagar and the covenant with Abraham.

Chiasm
* A: “Here I am, he replied” (1)
* B: Abraham took the wood for the burnt offering and placed it on his son Isaac (6)
* C: Went on together (6)
* D: “Yes my son? Abraham replied” (7)
* C': Went on together (8)
* B': He bound his son Isaac and laid him on the altar, on top of the wood. (9)
* A': “Here I am, he replied” (11)

In the critical moment, Abraham is not going to abandon his son. The Hebrew word used for Abraham’s response (Yes my son?) is *Hineni*. This word is also used in Abraham’s response to God in verses 1 and 11 - the word *Hineni* can also be translated as “Here I am”. It is similar to the phrase “the God who sees”, one who is here and is present in the moment, and who will not abandon His people. 

Notice this is contrary to the story of Hagar, where she leaves her son under a bush to die. (21:15-16)

## References
1. The Hebrew - Greek Key Study Bible (KJV Version)
2. [The BEMA Podcast, Episode 11: Here I Am](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/the-bema-podcast/id1148115183?i=1000378731563)
3. [The Torah Portion-by-Portion by Rabbi Seymour Rossel (2007)](https://a.co/d/boaYc5X)