---
layout: post
category: theology
title: Exodus 6
date: 2026-04-07
description: Uncircumcised Lips
comments: true
---
Uncircumcised Lips

<br>

We’ve read in the past few chapters about how Moses does not feel like he belongs in the role to lead the Hebrew people. This chapter contains the Lord’s response to Moses.

> Exodus 6:12 - “And Moses spake before the Lord, saying, Behold, the children of Israel have not hearkened unto me; how then shall Pharaoh hear me, who am of uncircumcised lips?”

This does not make sense, lips can not be circumcised! While using different words, this excuse sounds a lot like his excuse in Exodus 4.

> Exodus 4:10 - “And Moses said unto the Lord, O my Lord, I am not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou hast spoken unto thy servant: but I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.”

This is actually a chiasm, between Exodus 4 and Exodus 6. The middle point is the Zipporah story in Exodus 4b. 

Moses had an identity crisis - he is insecure because he doesn’t to embrace Hebrew identity. Why would Moses’s son not be circumcised, unless Moses did not consider himself to be apart of this family of God. Back in Exodus 6, we see the Lord reiterate His promises to Moses to let him know again that he is in fact, part of the family of God. 

Moses uses the excuse of uncircumcised lips again in verse 30.

> Exodus 6:30 - “And Moses said before the Lord, Behold, I am of uncircumcised lips, and how shall Pharaoh hearken unto me?”

There is actually a second chiasm in this chapter, between verses 12 and 30 where Moses speaks of his “uncircumcised lips”.

What is in the middle of Exodus 6 - a genealogy of Moses! The whole point of this is to show that Moses is part of the story and is absolutely a part of this people.

Who is more qualified to lead the people than Moses? He was raised in Pharaoh’s house and had access to their resources. He is of the tribe of Levi so he will not be forced into slavery when appearing before Pharaoh (remember the tribe of Levi weren’t in slavery). Moses also understands the Egyptian culture and perspective more than any other Israelite. 

God never responds to Moses by telling him his qualifications. He does not try to argue with Moses, rather God responded in this chapter by promising that He will be with Moses. 

God isn’t interested in our qualifications, he is interested in our availability. It doesn’t matter if we are not qualified - God will make us qualified if we give him our time and attention. God is looking for partners. Are we willing to be part of His story?

## References
1. The Hebrew - Greek Key Study Bible (KJV Version)
2. [The BEMA Podcast, Episode 17: A God Who Hears the Cry](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/the-bema-podcast/id1148115183?i=1000380710073)