---
layout: post
category: theology
title: Exodus 8
date: 2026-04-13
description: Frogs, Lice, and Flies
comments: true
---
Frogs, Lice, and Flies

<br>

In this chapter, we read about three more plagues: frogs, lice, and flies. 

Exodus 8:9-10 - “And Moses said unto Pharaoh, Glory over me: when shall I intreat for thee, and for thy servants, and for thy people, to destroy the frogs from thee and thy houses, that they may remain in the river only? And he said, To morrow. And he said, Be it according to thy word: that thou mayest know that there is none like unto the Lord our God.”

Pharaoh is concerned more with precision than about his people. Most of us, if asked when we wanted the frogs to go away, would say immediately. Pharaoh expects the gods to do things, but what he wouldn’t expect is that Moses can “control” the precision of the plagues. 

Polytheism = disconnected observer of the gods. People can’t control the precision of the power, we can only experience the power

Monotheism = God is intimately present in our world and in relationship with His creation. People can “control” the Power (to an extent), and can channel it by prayer to experience miracles like healings

Exodus 8:15 - “But when Pharaoh saw that there was respite, he hardened his heart, and hearkened not unto them; as the Lord had said.”

“hardened” = *kabad* or *kabed* [3513]
* To be heavy
* Hardened
* When I don’t see it for what it is

Exodus 8:18 - “And the magicians did so with their enchantments to bring forth lice, but they could not: so there were lice upon man, and upon beast.”

The first three plagues are a contest between Aaron’s Power (from the Lord God) and the Power of the Egyptian magician-priests. When the magicians of Egypt can not produce lice, they realize that the plagues are the “finger of God.” They have lost the contest. 

Will this cause Pharaoh’s heart to change?

Exodus 8:19 - “Then the magicians said unto Pharaoh, This is the finger of God: and Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them; as the Lord had said.”

“hardened” = *chazaq* [2388]
* To be strong
* Strengthened (resolve)
* When I do see it and power through

Exodus 8:22-23 - “And I will sever in that day the land of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there; to the end thou mayest know that I am the Lord in the midst of the earth. And I will put a division between my people and thy people: to morrow shall this sign be.”

“a division” = a redemption (Hebr.)

It is a redemption that will set apart the people of God from the people of the world (unbelievers). 

This is the first plague in which a division (or redemption) has been made for God’s people. Why did the Lord not separate His people from the beginning? 

As the people of God, we are not guaranteed freedom from hardship. Sometimes He protects us from harm, as in this fourth plague, and other times He protects us through the harm. 

Exodus 8:32 - “And Pharaoh hardened his heart at this time also, neither would he let the people go.”

“hardened” = *kabad* or *kabed* [3513]
* To be heavy
* Hardened
* When I don’t see it for what it is

Let's add these three plagues to our table:

| Plague | god/s of Egypt | Reference |
| ------ | -------------- | --------- |
| Water turned to blood | Khnum (guardian of Nile river source) and Hapi (personification of the Nile, fertility god) | Exodus 7 |
| Frogs | Heqet (regeneration, rebirth, and fertility god) | Exodus 8 |
| Lice | Geb (also known as Seb or Keb; god of the earth and fertility) | Exodus 8 |
| Flies | Shu (god of the air, supporter of the sky) | Exodus 8 |

## References:
1. The Hebrew - Greek Key Study Bible (KJV Version)
2. [The BEMA Podcast, Episode 19: A Strengthened Heart](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/the-bema-podcast/id1148115183?i=1000381299064)
3. [The Torah Portion-by-Portion by Rabbi Seymour Rossel (2007)](https://a.co/d/boaYc5X)
4. [The Meaning of the Ten Plagues and the Egyptian gods they Defeated](https://www.oneforisrael.org/the-meaning-of-the-ten-plagues-and-the-egyptian-gods-they-defeated/)
5. hardened = [*chazaq*](https://biblehub.com/hebrew/2388.htm)
6. hardened = [*kabad* or *kabed*](https://biblehub.com/hebrew/3513.htm)