---
layout: post
category: theology
title: Romans 9
date: 2026-04-22
description: True Israel is a Remnant
comments: true
---
True Israel is a Remnant

<br>

## The People of Israel (1-29)

Paul was an Israelite according to the flesh (3-4). To them pertains:
* the adoption
* the glory [noun]
* the covenants
* the giving of the law
* the service of God
* the promises

Paul goes on to say that not all people of Israel by the flesh are of Israel spiritually [believers].

> Romans 9:7 - “Neither, because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children: but, In Isaac shall thy seed be called.”

> Genesis 21:12 - “And God said unto Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy sight because of the lad, and because of thy bondwoman; in all that Sarah hath said unto thee, hearken unto her voice; for in Isaac shall thy seed be called.”

Abraham had two sons, one of the bondwoman Hagar, named Ishmael, and one of the free woman, Sarah, named Isaac. Abraham was sad that Sarah had casted out Hagar and Ishmael (because Ishmael had mocked her son Isaac).

Paul here is reiterating the promise of God: that in Isaac (not Ishmael) shall thy seed be called. It is not the children of the flesh who are the children of God, it is the children of promise who are the children of God (8).

> Romans 9:11 - “(For the children being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of works, but of him that [ppt] calleth;)”

[ppt] = The present participle expresses continuous or repeated action

To be a child of God is not of works, not based on what we do or don’t do. It is based on those whom God has called before they were even born. Paul uses the example of Jacob and Esau to show how this is true (12-13).

Is God unrighteous and unfair for doing this? No! (14)

> Romans 9:15 - “For he saith to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion.”

> Exodus 33:19 - “And he said, I will make all my goodness pass before thee, and I will proclaim the name of the Lord before thee; and will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will shew mercy on whom I will shew mercy.”

> Romans 9:16 - “So then it is not of him that [ppt] willeth, nor of him that [ppt] runneth, but of God that [ppt] sheweth mercy.”

It is not of our doing that we become children of God, it is only by His doing, who continuously and repeatedly shows His mercy. 

> Romans 9:17-18 - “For the scripture saith unto Pharaoh, Even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might shew my power in thee, and that my name might be declared throughout all the earth. Therefore hath he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardeneth.”

> Exodus 9:16 - “And in very deed for this cause have I raised thee up, for to shew in thee my power; and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth.”

God is saying that He was the one who put Pharaoh in the position as pharaoh of Egypt, in order to show His power, that the name of God would be declared throughout all the earth! Similarly, because it is God who raises us up, it is righteous and fair that he Has mercy on some and hardens the hearts of others (18), just as He did to Pharaoh in Exodus.

Why does God then find fault in some if it is He who hardens their hearts? No one has resisted the will of God! (19)

Paul’s response is that we should not ask this question because it is God who created us, we are His creation. He uses an analogy of a potter and clay: should the thing formed say to Him that formed it, “Why have you made me this?” Our Creator has the power and authority to make one vessel (person) unto honor and another unto dishonor (20-21).

> Romans 9:22-23 - “What if God, willing to shew his wrath, and [ainf] to make his power known, endured with much longsuffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction: And that he [asba] might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had afore prepared unto glory,”

[ainf] = simple, one time action. Does not signify the time of action

[asba] = simple, one time action. Makes an assertion about that which there is some doubt or uncertainty. Closely related to the future tense, which points to the fact that oftentimes there is only uncertainty because the action has not yet occurred.

“wrath” - Strong’s Concordance [3709]
* wrath, anger as a state of mind
* This is different from an outburst of anger for the purpose of revenge

God’s wrath is referring to His sentence of eternal judgement. To those fitted for destruction, God reveals His wrath through the eternal judgement. To those whom He created and prepared unto glory, God reveals the riches of his glory and mercy (22-23). Ultimately, God has called those both of the Jews and of the Gentiles (24), as a believer is one who is called and who has faith to believe, not simply one who was born from a certain lineage. 

> Hosea 1:10 - “Yet the number of the children of Israel shall be as the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured nor numbered; and it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said unto them, Ye are not my people, there it shall be said unto them, Ye are the sons of the living God.”

Those who were not originally God’s people, the Gentiles, will be called God’s people if they believe in faith.

> Romans 10:27 - “Isaiah also crieth concerning Israel, Though the number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, a remnant [fp] shall be saved:”

[fp] = future passive tense

> Isaiah 10:22 - “For though thy people Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a remnant of them shall return…”

> Genesis 22:17 - “That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies;”

Although God kept His promise to Abraham that his descendants would be as numerous as the sand of the sea, Paul is reiterating here the idea that only a remnant would receive the future glorification. Of course, we remember Romans 8:30, and believe that **all** those who are justified by God will also be glorified by God.

> Romans 8:30 - “Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified.”

Therefore, Paul is saying here that only a remnant would be justified (and thus glorified), despite Israel having many descendants in the flesh.

## The Gentiles Are Called (30-33)

Paul concludes the chapter by saying that those who follow after the works of the law will not receive righteousness because they sought it by works, not by faith. Those who seek righteousness by the law run toward God using the "wrong system" and stumble over the very Savior God provided. 

> Romans 9:33 - “As it is written, Behold, I lay in Zion a stumblingstone and rock of offence: and whosoever [ppt] believeth on him shall not be ashamed.”

offence = Strong’s Concordance [4625]
* denotes the enticement or occasion leading to confusion which brings with it the ruin of a person

For many, the idea of a crucified Messiah and justification by grace alone is offensive, causing them to reject Him and instead work to bring about their own justification, leading to their ruin. 

## References
1. The Hebrew - Greek Key Study Bible (KJV Version)
2. [Romans 9 - Greek Interlinear](https://biblehub.com/interlinear/romans/9.htm)