---
layout: post
category: theology
title: Romans 13
permalink: /blog/romans/13
date: 2026-05-18
description: Love One Another
comments: true
---
Love One Another

<br>

## "Subject unto the Higher Powers" (1-14)

In the previous chapter, Paul addressed the believers' conduct towards others. In this chapter, Paul uses verses 1-7 to discuss a believer’s conduct toward the governing authorities or those in power.

Paul says in verse 1 that every soul should be subject unto the higher powers, because they were put there and ordained by God.

> Romans 13:3 - “For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Wilt thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou shalt have praise of the same:”

Only those who do evil should be afraid of a ruler/ government. 

Because governments serve as God's servants for public order, Christians are expected to pay taxes, fees, and show proper respect to those in power.

> Romans 13:6-7 - “For for this cause pay ye tribute also: for they are God's ministers, attending continually upon this very thing. Render therefore to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute is due; custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear; honour to whom honour.”

Paul was writing to Christians living in the heart of the Roman Empire, encouraging them to be peaceful, law-abiding citizens so they could avoid unnecessary persecution and advance the Christian mission.

In verse 8, Paul then pivots from civic duty to our obligations toward one another, stating that believers should "owe no one anything, except to love each other." He summarizes the Ten Commandments (such as not committing adultery, murder, or stealing) under the single rule to "love your neighbor as yourself" (9).

> Romans 13:10 - “Love worketh no ill to his neighbour: therefore love is the fulfilling of the law.”

The chapter concludes with an end-times call to action. Paul calls believers to “awake out of sleep”, because their salvation is nearer now than when they first believed (11). 

> Romans 13:12 - “The night is far spent, the day is at hand: let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armour of light.”

Paul calls the people to put on the “armor of light”, casting out all works of darkness, including drunkenness, quarreling, and jealousy (13).

> Romans 13:14 - “But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof.”

To “put on” the Lord Jesus Christ means that you actively adopt Christlikeness - when others look at you, they see the qualities of Christ reflected. 

## References
1. The Hebrew - Greek Key Study Bible (KJV Version)
2. [Romans 13 - Greek Interlinear](https://biblehub.com/interlinear/romans/13.htm)