---
layout: post
category: theology
title: Romans 16
date: 2026-05-25
description: God is the Source
comments: true
---
God is the Source

<br>

## Greetings (1-16)

Paul uses most of the final chapter of the book of Romans to give greetings to friends, family, and coworkers in the faith. Notable is the high visibility of women in ministry!

This list of women includes:
* Phoebe (1-2) - a deacon of the church in Cenchreae and a benefactor to many, including Paul
* Priscilla (3) - a coworker in Chirst Jesus, who, alongside her husband Aquila, hosted a house church
* Mary (6) - a believer who worked veery hard for the Roman church community
* Junia (7) - a fellow prisoner with Paul who is decribed as being "of note [outstanding] among the apostles"
* Tryphena and Tryphosa (12) - ministry workers who labored faithfully in the Lord
* Persis (12) - described by Paul as "the beloved Persis," a woman who worked exceptionally hard unto the Lord.
* Rufus' Mother (13) - unnamed by Paul, but greeted affectionately as a woman who has been like a mother to him
* Julia (15) - a believer greeted alongside Philologus and other saints
* Nereus' Sister (15) - unnamed, but greeted alongside her brother Nereus and the local house church believers.

## Exhortation to Unity (17-27)

Paul does take a few verses to write to believers regarding false teachers:

> Romans 16:17 - “Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which [ppt] cause divisions and offences contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned; and avoid them.”

[ppt] = The present participle expresses continuous or repeated action

We don’t just avoid those who we disagree with one time, but we should avoid those who continuously seek to create division in the church. How do false teachers work to create division? 

> Romans 16:18 - “For they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.”

"fair speeches" - Strong’s Concordance [2129]
* commendation to man

"simple" - Strong’s Concordance [185]
* harmless

Those who may be false teachers will make other believers feel good with compliments and praise to man. That does not mean that anyone who gives a compliment (as Paul clearly does throughout this chapter) is a false teacher, but a true servant of the Lord will only give praise to God.

Paul is making a clear distinction between honoring people and worshipping God. Paul deeply values his coworkers in the faith, and he calls them out by name to show that their labor is seen and appreciated. At the same time, Paul knows that none of these people could do what they do without God's grace. To end this chapter, Paul gives praise only to God, saying that God is the ultimate source of their strength (25-27). Paul wants us to be aware of this truth, and to be “wise unto that which is good, and simple concerning evil” (19).

"simple" - Strong’s Concordance [185]
* Without any mixture of deceit, without any foreign material in him

> Romans 16:20 - “And the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.”

> Genesis 3:15 - “And I will put enmity between thee [the Serpent, or Satan] and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.”

Who shall bruise the Serpent? It seems unclear in Genesis. Paul is referencing this verse to show the partnership between mankind and God. We have the authority to bruise the head of Serpent because of our partnership with God (the source of our strength) and the Holy Spirit that lives in us.

It seems then that a sign of a false teacher would be one who does not bring due praise to God, but only to himself as the source of his strength.

Paul then sends final greetings from his companions, including Tertius, the actual scribe who wrote down the epistle of Romans. The book of Romans concludes with a praise to God for revealing the mystery of the Gospel to both Jews and Gentiles.

> Romans 16:25-26 - “Now to him [God] that is of [ppt] power to establish you according to my gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret since the world began, But now is made manifest, and by the scriptures of the prophets, according to the commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all nations for the obedience of faith:”

Paul is explicitly stating that it is God the Father who strengthens us, and he does this through Jesus Christ.

Continuing from the previous two verses:

> Romans 16:27 - “To God only wise, be glory through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen.”

## References
1. The Hebrew - Greek Key Study Bible (KJV Version)
2. [Romans 16 - Greek Interlinear](https://biblehub.com/interlinear/romans/16.htm)