---
layout: post
category: theology
title: Romans 15
permalink: /blog/romans/15
date: 2026-05-23
description: Edify One Another
comments: true
---
Edify One Another

<br>

## Edify One Another (1-13)

Paul continues his conversation from Romans 14 in this chapter. He reminds us again that those who are strong in faith should seek to bear the infirmities of those who are “weak in faith” (their faith is still developing). The strong in faith should not use their freedom to please themselves, but should seek to build up the faith of their weaker neighbors (1-2).

Christ is our example in this: Jesus lived as a man on earth not for his own personal comfort, but to fulfill the purposes of God, while also bearing the insults directed at God (3).

> Psalm 69:9 - “For the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up; and the reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me.”

Paul then highlights that the Old Testament Scriptures were written to give believers patience (endurance), comfort, and hope.

> Romans 15:4 - “For whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope.”

The goal of the Christian community is to be one, to glorify God together with one mind and one voice. Because Christ has accepted a diverse group of believers according to His glory, we also should accept one another.

Paul quotes several Old Testament passages to prove that God's plan always included the Gentiles worshipping Him alongside the Jews:

> Psalm 18:49 - “Therefore will I give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the heathen [Gentiles], and sing praises unto thy name.”

> Deuteronomy 32:43 - “Rejoice, O ye nations [Gentiles], with his people: for he will avenge the blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will be merciful unto his land, and to his people.”

> Psalm 117:1 - “O praise the Lord, all ye nations [Gentiles]: praise him, all ye people.”

> Isaiah 11:10 - “And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek: and his rest shall be glorious.”

Those Jews and Gentile Christians who believe this truth will be filled with all joy and peace, so that we may abound in hope. This joy, peace, and hope are all given freely by the Holy Spirit!

## Paul’s Diligence in Preaching the Gospel (14-33)

While Paul writes the rest of the chapter regarding the church in Rome and his particular mission, I believe there are still some practical applications for believers today.

Paul writes about his mission- to preach the gospel to the Gentiles (15-21).

> Romans 15:16 - “That I should be the minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, ministering the gospel of God, that the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost.”

> Isaiah 52:15 - “So shall he sprinkle many nations; the kings shall shut their mouths at him: for that which had not been told them shall they see; and that which they had not heard shall they consider.”

Paul had a unique calling: to go where no other man had laid a foundation of the gospel. We, too, have been given a unique set of Spiritual gifts ([Romans 12](https://fnmckee.com/theology/2026/05/16/romans-12.html)), and God wants to partner with us to advance His mission of growing His Kingdom.

> Romans 15:26-27 - “For it hath pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor saints which are at Jerusalem. It hath pleased them verily; and their debtors they are. For if the Gentiles have been made partakers of their spiritual things, their duty is also to minister unto them in carnal things.”

Paul highlights the financial gift that Gentile churches sent to the poor Jewish believers in Jerusalem. He notes that because the Gentiles shared in the Jews' spiritual blessings, they owed it to them to help with physical needs. 

When one part of the global church community suffers from poverty, disaster, or injustice, those with resources have a responsibility to provide practical, financial help.

## References
1. The Hebrew - Greek Key Study Bible (KJV Version)
2. [Romans 15 - Greek Interlinear](https://biblehub.com/interlinear/romans/15.htm)