---
layout: post
category: theology
title: Romans 14
date: 2026-05-21
description: The Christian's Liberty
comments: true
---
The Christian's Liberty

<br>

## “Why Dost Thou Judge Thy Brother?” (1-12)

> Romans 14:1 - “Him that is weak in the faith receive ye, but not to doubtful disputations.”

We must accept those Christians who are weak in faith, and not judge their doubtful thoughts. 

We can not accept those we do not interact with (i.e. the general public or strangers). The command is most urgent for your immediate family, your local church, and Christians you interact with directly.

Some people eat everything, others eat only plants. Some people consider one day to be the Sabbath, other people consider a different day to be the Sabbath. Do not judge each other for these differences because each is living unto the Lord (2-6).

Paul wrote this because Jewish and Gentile Christians in the local house churches of Rome were literally sitting across the dinner table from each other, arguing over the menu and calendar.

Who are we to judge another man’s servant? We, the servants, are accountable only to God, our master (4). It is He who is our Rightful Judge, who will hold us accountable when we die (10-12). 

It is clear that Paul is using this chapter to explain that we should not judge our brothers and sisters in Christ (other Christians), because we are all accountable servants to God. 

> Romans 14:7-9 - “For none of us liveth to himself, and no man dieth to himself. For whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto the Lord: whether we live therefore, or die, we are the Lord's. For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living.”

Whatever we do, whether we live or we die, we do unto the Lord. Christ both died and rose again in order to be Lord both of the dead and of the living! 

Why then do we judge each other? “For we shall all stand before the judgemnt seat of Christ.” (10)

> Romans 14:11-12 - “For it is written, As I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God. So then every one of us shall give account of himself to God.”

> Isaiah 45:23 - “I [the Lord] have sworn by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, That unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear.”

## The Christian’s Liberty (13-23)

> Romans 14:13 - “Let us not therefore judge one another any more: but judge this rather, that no man put a stumblingblock or an occasion to fall in his brother's way.”

Let no man cause another Christian in his community to fall. If someone believes that they should not eat meat to honor the Lord, then no one should tempt them with meat and cause them to do something they believe is wrong.

Paul writes in verse 14 that nothing itself is unclean, but what someone deems to be unclean for themselves is unclean for themselves.

> Romans 14:17 - “For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.”

A Christian should seek these things with everyone:
* righteousness
* peace
* joy

> Romans 14:18 - “For he that in these things serveth Christ is acceptable to God, and approved of men.”

By following after these things, Christians edify one another (19). When we argue about whether it is acceptable to eat meat, drink alcohol, or what day the Sabbath is on, we build up no one. 

> Romans 14:20 - “For meat destroy not the work of God. All things indeed are pure; but it is evil for that man who eateth with offence.”

All things are pure and acceptable, but it is evil for the man who believes something is wrong to partake. Christ died for all people, and eating meat will not destroy the work of God (15). In verse 21, Paul writes that believers should prioritize love over personal freedom. Paul tells Christians that if their freedom to eat meat or drink wine causes a fellow believer to panic, stumble, or violate their own conscience, they should willingly give it up in that moment.

> Romans 14:22-23 - “Hast thou faith? have it to thyself before God. Happy is he that condemneth not himself in that thing which he alloweth. And he that doubteth is damned if he eat, because he eateth not of faith: for whatsoever is not of faith is sin.”

## References
1. The Hebrew - Greek Key Study Bible (KJV Version)
2. [Romans 14 - Greek Interlinear](https://biblehub.com/interlinear/romans/14.htm)